Why Ansible is used?
-
- Before 10 years, devops was not that developed, then there were system admins. Primary task of system admins was configuration management
- Every company used to have their own on premises setup and used to have physical servers/virtual machines on private cloud
- Suppose the organization has only 1 sys admin and have 5 physical servers, 4 of which are Linux and 1 is windows. So sys admin used to install hypervisor or create VM on those physical servers.
- Primary task of sys admin was
  - To ensure distribution installed on these Linux VMs is up to date (to not have outdated packages, security issues)
  - To make sure packages and libraries (wget/curl/openshh) installed on these physical servers are free from vulnerabilities and application dependencies on these VMs are also secure. 
  - Do maintenance of these servers as well (of CPU, Memory and to ensure they are to be available all the time). 

- Tasks of sys admins :-
	- Make sure distribution version and system dependencies are up to date 
	- Application dependencies such as language, java runtime are up to date
	- To maintain the servers with resources like CPU,memory

- These activities sys admins need to perform manually or using scripts 

** Usual config management tasks 
- install packages on server
- install up to date dependencies and libraries
- make sure CPU, memory available all the time

- So even to update java version, sys admin had to login to machine and run command. 
  - These tasks sys admins can perform manually or using scripts. But shell scripts wont work on windows machines as their distribution is different (can also fail if one have centos Linux and one has Ubuntu Linux)
  - In shell script, sys admin can write "yum" command which will work on centOS but will fail on Debian or any other Linux distro. So very hectic thing for admins

- So we can say that config management was mostly manual. Due to these challenges, it was not easy for sys admins to configure multiple systems using scripts. Here config management tools like Puppet, Chef, Ansible came

--------------------------------------------------------------------

Puppet/Chef 
-
- Puppet/chef used to act as interface between sys admin and organizational servers/VM. Sys admins need to learn puppet/chef programming and write cookbooks/puppet scripts with which they can automate the things onto servers (using puppet script they can automate servers). So sys admins instead of writing shell script for Linux and powershell script for windows, they can write puppet script to automate tasks on target servers.
- Puppet scripts were used to automate tasks on target servers

- Challenges in Puppet
  - Sys admins needed to learn complex style of puppet/chef such as ruby
  - Puppet was not "agentless in architecture". Sys admins needed to go to each VM/physical and need to install agent (software) and needed to connect target machines(machines where to automate) with master (where puppet/chef is installed)
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Ansible to the Rescue
-
- In Ansible, We just need to know yml syntax.
- We can write playbooks in ansible in yml.
- Also ansible is agentless (we don't need to install any software on target machine). So preferred over chef,puppet 
- Machine on which we install ansible software are control nodes(VM- master) and using it we can manage configurations on managed nodes (VMs- worker)

- If we've 100s of VMs. We can choose any one as control node and install ansible on it. Using that VM we can manae=ge config of all VMs

  - Suppose we've been given a task to install java on all VMs. We'll write yaml file on control node, run ansible command which can talk to all other VMs (worker), java will be installed and run on all managed nodes (even if distribution of managed nodes is different)

- As it is agentless, on any of our managed nodes we dont have to install any software.

- **Features of Ansible**
  - Ansible is not only limited to configuration management. Ansible now if a very powerful automation platform.
  - Ansible can also do provisioning (create infrastructure/resources like EC2, S3 on cloud/servers just like terraform).
  - Ansible is also widely used for CICD deployment of artifacts on target servers. Using one control node it can deploy on multiple managed nodes/K8S clusters
  - Ansible can also be used for network automation. Using ansible we can talk to the network appliances like LBs, API Gateways in physical or virtual form and automate the things

--------------------------------------------------------------------

Ansible vs Python vs Shell Scripting
-
- We can use python/shell/ansible for automating installation of java on VM
- Lets say we are handling 5 VMs. We've to install java on all 5 VMs
  - We can login to each VM and install java manually.
  - We can also write simple shell script "yum install java" and run on VM manually logging on them one by one. If one VM is windows, using shell script our automation wont work as we might have different package managers on each VM.
  - But python can work for all VM whether it is Linux or windows as python is platform independent. So if we write python script and execute on all, it will get the task done. But here we need to know python programming, timely we have to maintain/update code/script to make sure its working, logging to each VM is tedious.
  - Here ansible works. We dont have to login to VM, just install ansible on control node which reads inventory file (config file) having info of related servers/VMs and it will install the required java JDK on each VM. So no manual intervention is required. Ansible is just YML
 
- Thus we can use Ansible over other scripting options

- To use python over ansible, when our tasks are like talk to API like create JIRA ticket, GitHub repo. As these tools dont have great ansible modules.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

Ansible or Terraform for Provisioning?
-
- Terraform has core skill of IaC and Provisioning. Terraform is dedicated tool for Provisioning.
- Ansible is automation platform for configuration management

--------------------------------------------------------------------

